answers.md, before:

# Datadog Solutions Engineer Exercise

This is a Technical exercise for the Solutions Engineering interview
process at Datadog.

Datadog is a monitoring service which allows you to quickly collect
data, visualize it and monitor your infrastructure at any scale. It does
this by collecting data from over 200 out of the box integrations
allowing you to install the Datadog agent everywhere - every server,
instance, VM & node container-running host to start the metrics flowing
to the Datadog backend. You may also submit custom application metrics by
writing your own agent check and capture the data critical for your
application or service.

Datadog allows you to visualize all of this data within the Datadog web
application. You can utilize the metrics explorer to search for a given
metric and watch its behavior. View / comment on events such as
application deployments as the data comes into the event stream. Filters
and custom Screenboards may also be configured so that you may see the
data they way you would like to in order to identify anomalies, outliers
or forecasts for your infrastructure.

In addition Datadog allows you to monitor your infrastructure wherever
it may live and identify problem areas or issues per your metrics using
Monitors. You may configure email, Slack or HipChat integrations to
receive notifications of any issues which have or are occurring. You may
also silence the alerts or schedule downtime so that in the event of a
maintenance window you are now spammed by alerts.

Go to [https://www.datadoghq.com/](https://www.datadoghq.com/) for more
information!

## Table of Contents

-   [Setup an Ubuntu VM](#setup-an-ubuntu-vm)

-   [Collecting Data](#collecting-data)

    -   [Installing the Agent](#installing-the-agent)

    -   [Configuring Tags](#tagging)

    -   [Installing and Monitoring PostgreSQL](#installing-and-monitoring-postgresql)

    -   [Writing a Custom Agent Check](#writing-a-custom-agent-check)

-   Visualizing Data

    -   PostgreSQL Dashboard

    -   Snapshot & Annotation

-   Alerting on Data

    -   Create a Monitor

    -   Email Screenshot

    -   Evening Down Time

-   Conclusion

# Setup an Ubuntu VM

For this we will be utilizing two tools called
[Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/) &
[Virtualbox](https://www.virtualbox.org/), vagrant is a tool for
building and managing development environments. Its a simple and
powerful way to manage virtual machines enforcing consistency across
multiple platforms. VirtualBox is a powerful x86 and
AMD64/Intel64 [virtualization](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Virtualization) product
for enterprise as well as home use.

-   [Install Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/installation/) for
    your operating system.

-   [Installing Virtualbox](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads)
    for your operating system.

-   Clone this repository to your local workstation

    -   git clone
        [https://github.com/knunez/hiring-engineers.git](https://github.com/knunez/hiring-engineers.git)

-   Within the same directory in which you cloned the repository run the
    following command: vagrant up This will trigger vagrant to provision
    an ubuntu 14.04

-   Upon first run bootstrap.sh will require several parameters:
```bash
    -   your\_api\_key=''

    -   username=''

    -   password=''
```
-   Without these the VM will still start however the following will not
    be installed or configured:

    -   Datadog Agent will not be installed.

    -   The database user for the Datadog agent will not be configured.

    -   PostgreSQL integration will not be configured.

-   You may run vagrant provision after the fact to execute the
    bootstrap.sh

-   You may now utilize vagrant ssh or ssh with your preferred terminal
    emulator to vagrant@localhost:2222, you will now be connected to the
    VM with a command prompt.

-   You may exit by simply typing exit at the prompt.

# Collecting Data
> Bonus question: In your own words, what is the agent?

All monitoring solutions rely on collected data to monitor and alert.
Datadog has a few ways in which to obtain this data, primarily however
this is obtained via the Datadog agent. The Datadog agent is software
which runs on the host and collects data metrics and events which it
then transmits back to Datadog.

## Installing the Agent

Datadog provides step-by-step guides for most common operating systems
which you may see
[here](https://app.datadoghq.com/account/settings#agent). There is a one
line installation script which may be used to install the Datadog agent
for your operating system however this may also be utilized to script
the installation of the agent in a bootstrap or launch script.

Example:

*DD\_API\_KEY=\$YOUR\_API\_KEY bash -c "\$(curl -L
[https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/dd-agent/master/packaging/datadog-agent/source/install\_agent.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/dd-agent/master/packaging/datadog-agent/source/install_agent.sh))"*

Below I have included an excerpt from the included bootstrap configuration
file demonstrating the automation of the Datadog agent. This will only
run on initial vagrant up or vagrant provision.
```bash
\#!/usr/bin/env bash

\# Input your information here

your\_api\_key=''

username=''

password=''

\# Check for API key.

if [ -z "\$your\_api\_key" ]

then

echo \>&2 "Your API Key is missing, The datadog agent will not install /
Run."

fi

\# Create a Variable for tags formatted as a string or list

tags="name:knunez, env:alpha, role:database"

apt-get update

\# Install desired packages, if already installed nothing will be done.
(This will install the latest version, keep in mind if you require a
specific version of a package.)

apt-get install -y git htop

\# Install / Configure DataDog Agent.

if dpkg-query -W datadog-agent; then

echo \>&2 "Datadog is already installed."

else

DD\_API\_KEY=\$your\_api\_key bash -c "\$(curl -L
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/dd-agent/master/packaging/datadog-agent/source/install\_agent.sh)"

fi
```
-   Be sure to input your Datadog API Key in bootstrap.sh

    -   Edit bootstrap.sh

        -   Your\_api\_key='Enter API Key Here'

-   Running vagrant provision while the vm is still running will execute
    the bootstraph.sh, install your Datadog Agent and populate the API
    Key to begin the transmission of data.

-   Once this step is complete you may go to your [Infrastructure Host
    Map](https://app.datadoghq.com/infrastructure/map) to see that the
    agent is indeed reporting back to Datadog.

-   A successful initial vagrant up or vagrant provision should give you
    the following:

## Tagging
> Add tags in the agent config file and show us a screenshot of your host and its tags on the Host Map page in Datadog.

Tagging is used throughout the Datadog product to make it easier to
subset and query the machines and metrics that you have to monitor.
Below I will include an excerpt from bootstrap.sh which allows you to
configure the tags in an automated way.
```bash
\# Create a Variable for tags formatted as a string or list

tags="name:your\_name, env:your\_env, role:your\_role"

\# Backup current datadog.conf and set tags in configuration according
to variabl

if [ -e /etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf ]

then

sudo sh -c "sed -i.bk 's/\^.\* tags:.\*/ tags: \$tags/'
/etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf"

else

echo \>&2 "Datadog.conf was missing, setting DD\_API\_KEY & tags"

sudo sh -c "sed 's/\^.\* tags:.\*/ tags: \$tags/'
/etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf.example \> /etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf"
```
-   This excerpt will take do the following

    -   Allow you to predefine the desired tags

        -   Tags='Insert your Tags Here'

    -   It will then check if the Datadog.conf file exists

        -   If it does it will create a backup of the file with a .bk
            extension

        -   It will also take your configured tags and add them to the
            Datadog.conf file.

    -   If the configuration file is missing it will copy the example
        configuration and write the desired configuration parameters.
![tag image](screenshots/Tags.PNG)
## Installing and Monitoring PostgreSQL
> Install a database on your machine (MongoDB, MySQL, or PostgreSQL) and then install the respective Datadog integration for that database.

- Below I have included an excerpt from bootstrap.sh which will do the following upon running intial vagrant up or vagrant provision
- This will bootstrap will first check that the role:database is found within tags:
-	It will then proceed with the install & enable PostgreSQL on boot.
-	It will then go a step further to verify that the username & password has been configured in bootstrap.sh
-	Create the Datadog agent user in the database & create the necessary permissions
-	It will install and configure the postgres.yaml integration for the Datadog agent.
-	Finally it will restart the Datadog agent
```bash
# Configure postgres datadog integration & Credentials

if grep -q '^.* tags:.* role:database*' /etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf;
then
        echo >&2 "Running postgres config."
        apt-get install -y postgresql postgresql-contrib
        update-rc.d postgresql enable
        service postgresql start
        if [ -z "$username" ]
        then
                echo >&2 "You username appears to be missing, if this is your first run please enter the desired username."
        else
                if [ -z "$password" ]
                then
                        echo >&2 "Your password appears to be missing, if this is your first run please enter the desired password."
                else
                        sudo -u postgres psql -c "CREATE USER $username WITH PASSWORD '$password';"
                        sudo -u postgres psql -c "GRANT SELECT ON pg_stat_database TO $username;"
                        # Checking if postgres data dog integration file is present & Configuring Credentials.
                        if [ -e /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml ]
                        then
                                echo >&2 'Starting configuration of postgres dd intergration'
                                sudo sh -c "sed -i.bk 's/^.* username:.*/\    username: $username/' /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml"
                                sudo sh -c "sed -i.bk 's/^.* password:.*/\    password: $password/' /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml"
                        else
                                echo >&2 'Copying example postgres integration file'
                                echo >&2 'Starting configuration of postgres dd intergration'
                                sudo sh -c "sed 's/^.* username:.*/\    username: $username/' /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml.example > /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml"
                                sudo sh -c "sed -i.bk 's/^.* password:.*/\    password: $password/' /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml"

                        fi
                fi
        fi
else
        echo >&2 "This is not a Database Server"
fi

# Restart / Reload the datadog configuration

service datadog-agent restart
```
![tag image](screenshots/postgres.png)
## Writing a Custom Agent Check

Create a custom Agent check that submits a metric named my\_metric with
a random value between 0 and 1000.

Datadog provides a great guide in order to write a custom [Agent
Check](https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/agent_checks/).

Commit message:

Adding additional content pertaining to yaml config

answers.md, after:

# Datadog Solutions Engineer Exercise

This is a Technical exercise for the Solutions Engineering interview
process at Datadog.

Datadog is a monitoring service which allows you to quickly collect
data, visualize it and monitor your infrastructure at any scale. It does
this by collecting data from over 200 out of the box integrations
allowing you to install the Datadog agent everywhere - every server,
instance, VM & node container-running host to start the metrics flowing
to the Datadog backend. You may also submit custom application metrics by
writing your own agent check and capture the data critical for your
application or service.

Datadog allows you to visualize all of this data within the Datadog web
application. You can utilize the metrics explorer to search for a given
metric and watch its behavior. View / comment on events such as
application deployments as the data comes into the event stream. Filters
and custom Screenboards may also be configured so that you may see the
data they way you would like to in order to identify anomalies, outliers
or forecasts for your infrastructure.

In addition Datadog allows you to monitor your infrastructure wherever
it may live and identify problem areas or issues per your metrics using
Monitors. You may configure email, Slack or HipChat integrations to
receive notifications of any issues which have or are occurring. You may
also silence the alerts or schedule downtime so that in the event of a
maintenance window you are now spammed by alerts.

Go to [https://www.datadoghq.com/](https://www.datadoghq.com/) for more
information!

## Table of Contents

-   [Setup an Ubuntu VM](#setup-an-ubuntu-vm)

-   [Collecting Data](#collecting-data)

    -   [Installing the Agent](#installing-the-agent)

    -   [Configuring Tags](#tagging)

    -   [Installing and Monitoring PostgreSQL](#installing-and-monitoring-postgresql)

    -   [Writing a Custom Agent Check](#writing-a-custom-agent-check)

-   Visualizing Data

    -   PostgreSQL Dashboard

    -   Snapshot & Annotation

-   Alerting on Data

    -   Create a Monitor

    -   Email Screenshot

    -   Evening Down Time

-   Conclusion

# Setup an Ubuntu VM

For this we will be utilizing two tools called
[Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/) &
[Virtualbox](https://www.virtualbox.org/), vagrant is a tool for
building and managing development environments. Its a simple and
powerful way to manage virtual machines enforcing consistency across
multiple platforms. VirtualBox is a powerful x86 and
AMD64/Intel64 [virtualization](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Virtualization) product
for enterprise as well as home use.

-   [Install Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/installation/) for
    your operating system.

-   [Installing Virtualbox](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads)
    for your operating system.

-   Clone this repository to your local workstation

    -   git clone
        [https://github.com/knunez/hiring-engineers.git](https://github.com/knunez/hiring-engineers.git)

-   Within the same directory in which you cloned the repository run the
    following command: vagrant up This will trigger vagrant to provision
    an ubuntu 14.04

-   Upon first run bootstrap.sh will require several parameters:
```bash
    -   your\_api\_key=''

    -   username=''

    -   password=''
```
-   Without these the VM will still start however the following will not
    be installed or configured:

    -   Datadog Agent will not be installed.

    -   The database user for the Datadog agent will not be configured.

    -   PostgreSQL integration will not be configured.

-   You may run vagrant provision after the fact to execute the
    bootstrap.sh

-   You may now utilize vagrant ssh or ssh with your preferred terminal
    emulator to vagrant@localhost:2222, you will now be connected to the
    VM with a command prompt.

-   You may exit by simply typing exit at the prompt.

# Collecting Data
> Bonus question: In your own words, what is the agent?

All monitoring solutions rely on collected data to monitor and alert.
Datadog has a few ways in which to obtain this data, primarily however
this is obtained via the Datadog agent. The Datadog agent is software
which runs on the host and collects data metrics and events which it
then transmits back to Datadog.

## Installing the Agent

Datadog provides step-by-step guides for most common operating systems
which you may see
[here](https://app.datadoghq.com/account/settings#agent). There is a one
line installation script which may be used to install the Datadog agent
for your operating system however this may also be utilized to script
the installation of the agent in a bootstrap or launch script.

Example:

*DD\_API\_KEY=\$YOUR\_API\_KEY bash -c "\$(curl -L
[https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/dd-agent/master/packaging/datadog-agent/source/install\_agent.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/dd-agent/master/packaging/datadog-agent/source/install_agent.sh))"*

Below I have included an excerpt from the included bootstrap configuration
file demonstrating the automation of the Datadog agent. This will only
run on initial vagrant up or vagrant provision.
```bash
\#!/usr/bin/env bash

\# Input your information here

your\_api\_key=''

username=''

password=''

\# Check for API key.

if [ -z "\$your\_api\_key" ]

then

echo \>&2 "Your API Key is missing, The datadog agent will not install /
Run."

fi

\# Create a Variable for tags formatted as a string or list

tags="name:knunez, env:alpha, role:database"

apt-get update

\# Install desired packages, if already installed nothing will be done.
(This will install the latest version, keep in mind if you require a
specific version of a package.)

apt-get install -y git htop

\# Install / Configure DataDog Agent.

if dpkg-query -W datadog-agent; then

echo \>&2 "Datadog is already installed."

else

DD\_API\_KEY=\$your\_api\_key bash -c "\$(curl -L
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/dd-agent/master/packaging/datadog-agent/source/install\_agent.sh)"

fi
```
-   Be sure to input your Datadog API Key in bootstrap.sh

    -   Edit bootstrap.sh

        -   Your\_api\_key='Enter API Key Here'

-   Running vagrant provision while the vm is still running will execute
    the bootstraph.sh, install your Datadog Agent and populate the API
    Key to begin the transmission of data.

-   Once this step is complete you may go to your [Infrastructure Host
    Map](https://app.datadoghq.com/infrastructure/map) to see that the
    agent is indeed reporting back to Datadog.

-   A successful initial vagrant up or vagrant provision should give you
    the following:

## Tagging
> Add tags in the agent config file and show us a screenshot of your host and its tags on the Host Map page in Datadog.

Tagging is used throughout the Datadog product to make it easier to
subset and query the machines and metrics that you have to monitor.
Below I will include an excerpt from bootstrap.sh which allows you to
configure the tags in an automated way.
```bash
\# Create a Variable for tags formatted as a string or list

tags="name:your\_name, env:your\_env, role:your\_role"

\# Backup current datadog.conf and set tags in configuration according
to variabl

if [ -e /etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf ]

then

sudo sh -c "sed -i.bk 's/\^.\* tags:.\*/ tags: \$tags/'
/etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf"

else

echo \>&2 "Datadog.conf was missing, setting DD\_API\_KEY & tags"

sudo sh -c "sed 's/\^.\* tags:.\*/ tags: \$tags/'
/etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf.example \> /etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf"
```
-   This excerpt will take do the following

    -   Allow you to predefine the desired tags

        -   Tags='Insert your Tags Here'

    -   It will then check if the Datadog.conf file exists

        -   If it does it will create a backup of the file with a .bk
            extension

        -   It will also take your configured tags and add them to the
            Datadog.conf file.

    -   If the configuration file is missing it will copy the example
        configuration and write the desired configuration parameters.
![tag image](screenshots/Tags.PNG)
## Installing and Monitoring PostgreSQL
> Install a database on your machine (MongoDB, MySQL, or PostgreSQL) and then install the respective Datadog integration for that database.

- Below I have included an excerpt from bootstrap.sh which will do the following upon running intial vagrant up or vagrant provision
- This will bootstrap will first check that the role:database is found within tags:
-	It will then proceed with the install & enable PostgreSQL on boot.
-	It will then go a step further to verify that the username & password has been configured in bootstrap.sh
-	Create the Datadog agent user in the database & create the necessary permissions
-	It will install and configure the postgres.yaml integration for the Datadog agent.
-	Finally it will restart the Datadog agent
```bash
# Configure postgres datadog integration & Credentials

if grep -q '^.* tags:.* role:database*' /etc/dd-agent/datadog.conf;
then
        echo >&2 "Running postgres config."
        apt-get install -y postgresql postgresql-contrib
        update-rc.d postgresql enable
        service postgresql start
        if [ -z "$username" ]
        then
                echo >&2 "You username appears to be missing, if this is your first run please enter the desired username."
        else
                if [ -z "$password" ]
                then
                        echo >&2 "Your password appears to be missing, if this is your first run please enter the desired password."
                else
                        sudo -u postgres psql -c "CREATE USER $username WITH PASSWORD '$password';"
                        sudo -u postgres psql -c "GRANT SELECT ON pg_stat_database TO $username;"
                        # Checking if postgres data dog integration file is present & Configuring Credentials.
                        if [ -e /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml ]
                        then
                                echo >&2 'Starting configuration of postgres dd intergration'
                                sudo sh -c "sed -i.bk 's/^.* username:.*/\    username: $username/' /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml"
                                sudo sh -c "sed -i.bk 's/^.* password:.*/\    password: $password/' /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml"
                        else
                                echo >&2 'Copying example postgres integration file'
                                echo >&2 'Starting configuration of postgres dd intergration'
                                sudo sh -c "sed 's/^.* username:.*/\    username: $username/' /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml.example > /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml"
                                sudo sh -c "sed -i.bk 's/^.* password:.*/\    password: $password/' /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml"

                        fi
                fi
        fi
else
        echo >&2 "This is not a Database Server"
fi

# Restart / Reload the datadog configuration

service datadog-agent restart
```
![tag image](screenshots/postgres.PNG)

Below you can see the parameters that have been updated within /etc/dd-agent/conf.d/postgres.yaml

```yaml
init_config:

instances:
  - host: localhost
    port: 5432
    username: datadog
    password: monitoring
```

To verify the premissions you may run the following commands:

```bash
psql -h localhost -U datadog postgres -c \
"select * from pg_stat_database LIMIT(1);"
&& echo -e "\e[0;32mPostgres connection - OK\e[0m" || \
|| echo -e "\e[0;31mCannot connect to Postgres\e[0m"

```
When prompted for the password enter the password you configured within bootstrap.sh

## Writing a Custom Agent Check

Create a custom Agent check that submits a metric named my\_metric with
a random value between 0 and 1000.

Datadog provides a great guide in order to write a custom [Agent
Check](https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/agent_checks/).
